JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
quiet and tragic end to the
sad story of Otto Warmbier, and
the implications for the United
States' dealings with his
former captors in North Korea.
John Yang has that.
JOHN YANG: Speaking in
the Oval Office, President
Trump condemned the
death of Otto Warmbier,
who had been detained in
North Korea for nearly
a year-and-a-half.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: It's a total
disgrace, what happened to Otto.
It should never, ever
be allowed to happen.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump
also indirectly blamed
the Obama administration
for not getting him
home sooner.
DONALD TRUMP: He should have
brought home that same day.
The result would have
been a lot different.
JOHN YANG: The president's
spokesman said Warmbier's death
casts a shadow on Mr. Trump's
stated willingness to talk to
his North Korean counterpart
under the right conditions.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary: Clearly, we're
moving further away, not closer
to those conditions
being enacted.
JOHN YANG: Later, the president
seemed to abandon his goal of
enlisting China to pressure
North Korea: "While I greatly
appreciate the efforts of
President Xi and China to help
with North Korea, it
has not worked out.
At least I know China tried."
North Korea's release of
the 22-year-old Warmbier
has increased, not eased
tensions with Pyongyang.
He arrived in Ohio
last week in a coma.
Doctors said Warmbier suffered a
severe neurological injury with
extensive loss of brain tissue,
likely as a result of a
lack of blood to his brain.
DR.
DANIEL KANTER, University of
Cincinnati Health: A state
of unresponsive wakefulness.
JOHN YANG: He'd been sentenced
in March 2016 to 15 years hard
labor for allegedly taking
a propaganda poster
from a Pyongyang hotel.
In a statement, Warmbier's
parents said, "The awful,
torturous mistreatment
our son received
at the hands of the North
Koreans ensured that no
other outcome was possible."
In an interview broadcast today
on CBS News, newly-elected
South Korean President Moon
Jae-in joined in
condemning the North.
MOON JAE-IN, South Korean
President (through translator):
I believe we must now have the
perception that North Korea
is an irrational regime.
JOHN YANG: Moon, who had
campaigned on engaging
North Korea, said all
options are on the table.
MOON JAE-IN (through
translator): When it comes
to preemptive strike,
which you mentioned,
I believe that this is something
we may be able to discuss
at a later stage, when the
threat has become
even more urgent.
JOHN YANG: North Korea
still holds three other
Americans as prisoners.
Today, a pair of U.S. B-1B
bombers, like these, flew
over South Korea, just
below the demilitarized
zone, in a show of force.
So, what effect will the
death of Otto Warmbier
have on the wider, and
seemingly intractable,
question of how the
United States should
deal with North Korea?
What options are left?
To probe those questions
and more, we turn to veteran
diplomat Kathleen Stephens.
She was U.S. ambassador to
South Korea from 2008 to 2011.
She's now at
Stanford University.
And that's where she
joins us tonight.
Ambassador Stephens, thank you.
What about that question?
Is this tragic story of Otto
Warmbier going to affect,
have any impact on the way the
United States
approaches North Korea?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS, Former U.S.
Ambassador to South Korea:
Well, I certainly think it's
a reminder to us that the threat
and the danger that North Korea
poses, not just to the United
States, but to the region and
the world, goes even beyond
its nuclear missile programs,
which we have been so
rightly focused on in
recent weeks and months.
I also need to add, I myself
want to just express my deepest
condolences to the Warmbier
family and to all the
friends, and I know there
are many, and family of Otto.
The treatment that he received
while under North Korean
custody for a year-and-a-half
was appalling and outrageous.
And I think the North
Koreans owe a full
explanation to his family
and to the United States of
what happened.
JOHN YANG: Does the approach,
is it complicated by the fact
that there are three Americans
still being held?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well,
I think it concentrates
the mind certainly of
the United States, and
I hope in Pyongyang as well,
that this is untenable.
And I would hope that, in the
coming days - - and I believe
this will happen -- that
there will be a renewed pressure
and effort to win the release
of these three Americans
who are being held.
There are others of other
nationalities as well.
North Korea in an area of
allowing access to foreigners
who have been arrested while
in North Korea, which it is
obligated to do under standard
diplomatic procedure, it hasn't
met those obligations,
as it doesn't meet its
obligations in other areas.
It needs to do that.
But it really needs to move
-- to stop this practice of
holding, arresting and holding
citizens, not allowing
their representatives
from their countries
to have access to them,
and often using them as or
hoping to use them as leverage
to -- as hostages, essentially,
and as bargaining chips.
It needs to stop.
It needs to be a part of our
overall approach and effort.
It has been, but it needs to
be reemphasized going forward
that this too is part of the
effort to get North
Korea to live up to some
minimal standards of
international behavior.
JOHN YANG: Live up to
some minimal standards.
We have had sanctions in
place for a long time.
We have had people describe
it as an irrational regime.
What are the real pressure
points on North Korea?
What can make a
difference to North Korea?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well, it is
a very challenging question.
I think one thing that
remains very important
is, notwithstanding maybe
some welcome realism
about perhaps the limits of
what China can or will do,
China does remain an important
actor in this, as
does South Korea.
So, I think, with meetings
coming up tomorrow in
Washington -- Secretary
Tillerson and Mattis
will be meeting with their
Chinese counterparts.
Next week, the new South Korean
president, Moon Jae-in, will
be meeting with President
Trump.
Clearly, North Korea will
be very much on the agenda,
but, in the context of what's
happened, these are going to
be even more somber meetings.
And I think the effort
will be to look both at
better implementation
of the pressure and
sanctions now in effect, and
also into some new ones that
might bring greater pressure
to get North Korea to take a
different path and a path that
will lead to some discussion
of how it can meet its
international obligations.
JOHN YANG: President Moon,
of course, ran on a campaign
talking about engagement with
North Korea.
He wanted to go to the
-- to pressure North
Korea to the negotiating
table, while President
Trump talks about pressuring
North Korea to get rid
of its nuclear program.
What are the chances
or the likelihood that
these two leaders can
find a common approach
to North Korea when they meet
here in Washington next week?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well, it's
their very first meeting.
They're both very new in office,
President Moon in particular.
And I think a lot is
going to depend on the
kind of relationship
and rapport they're able
to establish with each other.
President Trump established a
good rapport with the Japanese
prime minister, of course,
with the Chinese president, Mr.
Xi, although today he seemed
to be a little bit disappointed
in him.
So I think, one, the
personal relationship is
going to be important.
But, two, I think it will be
important for President Moon
to explain the South Korean
perspective.
The South Koreans actually
over many decades have seen
thousands and thousands of their
citizens abducted and
held in the North, and
six are being held right
now just within recent
months and years.
So, this is a heartfelt
issue for South Korea,
as well, as well as, of
course, the continuing
security threat of North Korea.
So, they're under no
illusions about the threat.
The challenge will be, as you
suggest, how to harmonize these
approaches and also harmonize
them with China's approach in
the region, which certainly
sees the need for a change
in behavior in North
Korea, but they're
worried about instability.
It's not going to be easy,
but having these meetings
is an important first step.
JOHN YANG: Ambassador Kathleen
Stephens, thanks for joining us.